---
title: Why Character Matters
author: David
layout: post
date: 2010-07-05
categories: [archive, broken_abbey, shu_journal]
---

I just finished reading [Edward Lee](http://www.edwardleeonline.com/)'s
[_The Golem_](http://amzn.to/cjs1rX). This is my first encounter with any of
Edward Lee's work. I believe every author should have two chances, so Ed Lee has
one left. To me, the book read like a first draft, but I'll get to that.

We don't see the golem used much in popular fiction. I can only recall one
instance where I've seen it used--an old episode of the X-Files called
[_Kaddish_](http://bit.ly/campOV). Lee brings the reader a modern version of an
old Jewish folk tale based on [Judah Loew](http://bit.ly/bArhVJ), a 16th century
rabbi who created a golem to defend a Prague ghetto from anti-Semitic attacks.
Lee brings the folktale to life with vibrant rituals and an exploration of a
dark sect of Kabbalah based on Kischuph. The story revolves around the small
town of Lowensport, Maryland. In 1880, a group of Jewish refugees from Prague,
led by the evil rabbi Gavriel Loew, construct two golems to defend themselves
from the attack of the Conner clan, a local group of settlers lead by an
ex-military deserter. The story is told in parallel with the present-day tale of
Seth Kohn and his girlfriend Judy, who move into the old Lowen mansion and find
themselves in the middle of a plan by Gavriel's great-great-great grandson to
resurrect Gavriel as a golem and--you guessed it--take over the world, or at
least small part of it.

I think the book presents an interesting bit of folklore, but aside from that, I
didn't find much appealing here. I don't know if this work is representative of
Mr. Lee's style (I'll have to read another to decide), but I had difficulty in
getting into the book because of the language. The book is riddled with adverbs,
which isn't necessarily a problem in and of itself but Lee uses them to such an
extent that I found myself struggling to visualize much of anything in the book.
For instance, twice in the work Lee uses the word 'paranoically' to describe two
different characters.

> "Of course!" But then [Judy] looked paranoically behind her. (pg. 24)

And

> Czanek looked paranoically over his shoulder again. (pg. 52)

In both instances, Lee provides the action (the showing)--both characters look
over their shoulder. The reader sees what the characters are doing and the
context provides the tension. What does the word 'paranoically' bring to the
reader? The reader is bumped from the story with such an awkward word. These are
two instances, but they are representative of the work's style. I found myself
jostled from the story with almost every turn of the page. This is what made the
book feel like a first draft. I think the language could have been cleaned up
and more appropriate description put in to help draw the reader deep into the
story.

In addition to the language, I struggled with some key things Lee chose to focus
on in the story. The reader gets two pages describing the video game Seth wrote
and sold to make his millions, but the game itself has very little to do with
the storyline. The reader also gets a lot of time spent on Switchgrass, the
local cash crop, but again, other than providing a setting for characters to
hide in, the Switchgrass and its use as a biofuel has little to do with the
story. Whats more, the way the reader finds out many of these details was
bothersome. Judy, being an ex-college professor, seems to know a bit about
everything. Whenever the reader needs an explanation, or even when the reader
doesn't, Judy pipes up to give details. Yet, when she's walking through the
Switchgrass, the reader gets a strange gap in her knowledge:

> _Watch for snakes_, she recalled the remarks of the man from the state. This
> new path was barely shoulder width. Did ticks live in switchgrass? No, she
> didn't think so. (pg. 194)

We get pages of infodump from this character, but when it comes to something as
trivial as ticks, she seems at a loss.

So, style aside, is there a good story here? It's interesting in terms of the
ritual and folklore of the golem, but I found myself struggling to care about
what happened to any of these characters.

First, the 1880 story centers around a group of black-magic Jewish refugees
(evil guys) locked in a struggle the Conner clan, with a group of local settlers
led by an ex-military deserter and his cohorts (evil). I found neither side
appealing, so I had no one to root for. Both sides wind up wiping each other
out, leaving a single golem. I found nothing redeeming in the people on either
side of this conflict. I initially had some sympathy for the Jewish refugees
until it became clear that they were ousted by their own people in Prague
because of their adherence to Kischuph. So while there's some satisfaction in
having a bunch of bad guys kill each other, there's no one left at the end that
I cared about.

The present-day story centers on Seth Kohn and his girlfriend Judy. Seth is a
game designer lost his wife two years earlier and struggled through a bout of
alcoholism. His girlfriend is an ex-college professor who struggled with crack
addiction. They met in rehab. But when the story opens, both have recovered,
Seth has made millions on his video game, and they buy Seth's dream home near
Lowensport, Maryland. These people have everything, so I also had trouble
sympathizing with either of them. During the course of the story, Judy falls off
the wagon and gets raped several times by local drug dealers as part of the plot
to recover Gavriel Lowen's head from the mansion, but by the time this all
happens I, as a reader, have already disconnected from her as a character.

Compare these two with the main characters in
[Nate Kenyon](http://bit.ly/adTYC7)'s novel
[_Bloodstone_](http://amzn.to/dt9Ek6). Billy Smith is an ex-convict, guilty of
drunk driving and manslaughter. Billy is paired with Gloria Johnson, a heroin
addict and hooker. These are sympathetic characters at low points in their
lives, victims of circumstance to a degree. The reader cares about Billy, who
has done his time but still lives burdened by the guilt of his crime. The reader
cares about Gloria, a victim of drug addiction who, at the start of the story,
is near the end of her rope. We cheer them on, we want them to get better.

Overall, I think The Golem provides little in the way of a good writing or good
story telling. But I have to admit, if this book is ever made into a move, I
will watch it. I think there are some visually stunning scenes: the Kischuph
ritual of golemancy, the dynamiting of the mill, and of course the murderous
mayhem inflicted by the golems. I have a deep love for horror movies, and I'm
much more forgiving of story in exchange for the visual appeal.

I look forward to giving Lee's work another chance. If you have suggestions of
what is representative of Lee's writing, post a comment. I'd love to hear from
you!
