---
title: “On Writing Horror” – Part Six
author: David
layout: post
date: 2009-10-11
categories: [archive, broken_abbey, shu_journal]
---

Part 6 of _On Writing Horror_ is titled "Tradition and Modern Times", a series
of articles covering horror tradition and its place in our modern literature.

**No More Silver Mirrors: The Monster in Our Times, _Karen E. Taylor_**

Taylor addresses how the old monsters can be made new again. She's got some good
advice, and I'll get to that in a second, but there's something she says early
on that is direct opposition to what at least one other author claims in this
series of articles. Taylor states:

> ...modern readers are more sophisticated than their parents and grandparents.
> Today's readers also require _credible premises_ and _explanations_; they want
> things to be _scientifically possible_.

I added the emphases. Compare this to what Winter states in section 5:

> But today, _explanation_, whether supernatural or rational, is simply not the
> business of horror fiction.

Again, I added the emphasis. Who's right? What's going on here? At first blush,
they do seem to contradict one another. But, based on the advice Taylor goes
into, I think they are consistent with each other. I took Winter to mean that
the modern story itself need not necessarily address the reason for the events
it contains. To me, he's speaking to whether or not the internals of the story
must link to an external reason. Taylor, on the other hand, is speaking in terms
of internal consistency.

She first addresses the question of consistency and the rules of your story. She
suggests that, unless you as the writer know the rules for your 'monster', you
cannot meet reader expectation and deliver a believable story. So, whether you
start with a vampire or a werewolf, you must first understand and commit to the
rules of the trope. And then, you can decide which ones to break. But, when you
break the rules, you must remain internally consistent.

The other two bits of advice she offers are to spend time in characterization of
your monster and to know your reader. I don't recall the first being addressed
in any other articles, and it's good advice for the modern horror writer. It
seems that a generalization of the horror genre is the stupid, lumbering,
unstoppable force of the monster, a thing to be reckoned with rather than a
person to interact with. She suggests taking the time to provide the reader with
your monster's point-of-view, and that by doing so, you can help the reader
better understand the internal and external processes that make this monster a
possibility. Again, the explanation lies not in locating a foundation in
reality, but in creating an internally consist world where that monster can and
does exist.

The part about knowing your reader is common advice, but no less important. In
the context of the article, Taylor is emphasizing that in order to create and
maintain the consistency while using the venerable monsters of old, you must as
a writer address the reader's expectations. You don't have to meet the
expectation, but if you're going to violate an expectation, you must create the
internal consistency that will help the reader accept your violation.

**Fresh Blood from Old Wounds: The Alchemist Meets the Biochemist, _Joseph
Curtin_**

I personally did not get a lot from this article, I think primarily due to its
subject matter. Curtin describes how the modern horror writer can leverage
current-day science to enhance or refresh old tropes. He cites how Dean Koontz
refreshed _Frankenstein_ in his series of books, and how Michael Crichton
refreshed _The Lost World_ with _Jurassic Park_. These story achieved a
freshness by enhancing the old story with current scientific thought on how the
'monsters' could be produced.

He also talks about the modern social fear is in Biotechnology, and relates that
to the Cold War terror of the prior generation.

To me, this is an advocation of explaining the beast and tying it to an external
plausibility. It's good advice, but for me, it's not necessarily relevant. My
current interest and focus is in leveraging myth as a basis for horror, not
leveraging science. If and when I change focus, I'll be sure to come back and
revisit this article to prime myself.

**More Simply Human, _Tracy Knight_**

Knight's article gives some great insight into characterization of personality
and mental disorders. He cites some common errors in representing these and a
list of reference material that writer's can use to validate or help ensure that
they're portraying these things accurately. He also clearly states that he's not
advocating the use of mental disorder, but just wants to help make sure that it
is done accurately.

- Aside from the reference material, Knight goes on to clear up a few common
  misconceptions.
- Current psychotherapy goes well beyond Freud. Know and make use of
  contemporary techniques.
- Take care not to stereotype based on the reference material. Not everyone has
  every symptom.
- People who are unbalanced are, in fact, less likely to be unpredictable due to
  the nature of mental illness. People with personality disorders are more
  rigid, predictable, and inflexible than the rest of us in terms of their
  perception and interactions.
- The behavior of people with mental disorders is not without goals. Every
  behavior has a goal, and they are coherent and consistent with how each of us
  views the world.
- Everyone does what they believe to be their best.

Some of Knight's advice, particularly the last two, I think demonstrate that
people with mental or personality disorders are still human like the rest of us.

**The Possibility of the Impossible, _Tom Piccirilli_**

This is the first time I've ever really considered the close relationship
between horror and humor. Piccirilli does a great job of demonstrating how both
derive from the surreal - the juxtaposition of the normal and abnormal Combining
things in new and interesting ways also provides the writer with the ability to
create new and interesting metaphors. And that is foundational to all fiction,
in my opinion. Like Taylor, Piccirilli also stresses the importance of internal
logic or consistency in creating the illusion.

**Take a Scalpel to Those Tropes, _W. D. Gagliani_**

Gagliani rehashes the previously presented ideas of combining old things in new
ways to innovate and altering the rules for freshness. What I liked about this
particular article is that Gagliani uses this short piece as a practical
demonstration through one of his own works. Nothing new, but it serves to
reinforce some very useful ideas.

**That Spectered Isle: Tradition, Sensibility, and Delivery Or Ghosts? What
Ghosts?, _Steven Savile_**

While the premise of Savile's article is about the difference between American
and British horror, the real value to me is in getting yet another perspective
on horror without monsters. He gives 2 resasons for what he calls the "British
Sensility":

Britain has a long history and rich heritage that is filled with ghost stories.

Brain has a heritage of "withstanding atrocities with that stubborn stiff upper
lip".

What he lead to is that the most frightening things to the British audience are
those that can't be seen. So, the most frightening things are those based on
internals - social ills, ghosts, stuff that can't be seen. I think what he is
driving at is that there's tremendous value for the modern horror author in
working with things less tangible than the old vampires and werewolves. I wasn't
really getting a point from him until he brought up Easton Ellis's _American
Psycho_. It works so well because it drives the reader into the head of a
madman. Aside from the gruesome acts of the main character, being inside his
head adds an element of horror beyond.

**New Horrors: A Roundtable Discussion of Horror Today and Tomorrow, _Joe
Nassise (moderator)_**

I don't have much to say on this. All four authors (Pat Tremblay, Gary Frank,
Melinda Thielbar, Nate Kenyon) provide some good advice. But it's short, so none
of them really have the opportunity to delve into any one subject. It's
definitely a good read for new authors, as you can see that even here, not all
authors play by the same rules or focus on the same things. Here are the
questions posed to the group:

- What are the three most important skills a new writer should have?
- What three pieces of advice to new writers do you not agree with?
- What's different about the publishing industry today than when you started?
  What'll happen over the next couple of years?
- What's the value of horror to the literary community?

Like I said, interesting questions and a variety of answers (sometime
contradicting one another), but nothing that I felt helped me out.
