---
title: “On Writing Horror” – Part Seven
author: David
layout: post
date: "2009-10-15T00:01:00-05:00"
categories: [archive, broken_abbey, shu_journal]
---

Part 7 of _On Writing Horror_ is titled "Genre and Subgenre", but the 10
articles also cover concerns with medium as well (screenplay, theater, audio).

**Archetypes and Fearful Allure: Writing Erotic Horror, _Nancy Kilpatrick_**

I really struggled with this one. Kilpatrick seems to rely heavily on the
concept of Archetypes, and the crux of her advice can be summed up in the
following quote:

> This means that the energy embedded in the image resonates with all readers
> because it taps into and stirs up the collective unconscious.

I don't see anything practical in that sort of advice. I mean, conceptually,
it's a neat way of thinking about it - Archetypes as a framework for developing
characters can be useful. But, I didn't find any truly functional advice in
here.

A few other things bothered me. She makes a pretty bold statement when she
addresses the balance between Erotic and Horror in a single story: "The story
needs to perform on both levels equally." My problem is, this is a black and
white statement. The story works if it achieves and appropriate balance, not by
achieving 100% equality on each side.

The rest of the article reiterated a lot of the same things as the other.
Reinforcement of good ideas, but nothing really new or useful to me personally.

**Writing for the New Pulps: Horror-Themed Anthologies, _John Maclay_**

This one interested me. I always thought Anthologies were 'invite only'
publications. Goes to show how little I know about the publishing world. Anyhow,
Maclay and the editors he interviewed make some good cases for working with
anthologies.

- They are geared to sell, although not necessarily in a way that authors make
  significant money.
- They are an opportunity for new authors to get published next to established
  authors.
- They have taken the place of the old pulp magazines, many of which are
  dwindling or defunct.

Never considered it as an accessible market, now I will. I guess that's what I
got from this.

**Freaks and Fiddles, Banjos and Beasts: Writing Redneck Horror, _Weston
Ochse_**

Great introduction to Urban Horror. Honestly, I've never really given much
serious consideration to what exactly it is, but I really think Ochse gets to
the heart of the matter. Urban Horror is about isolation, not locale. Urban
Gothic, Brian Keene's latest novel, is a great example of this concept. It's a
standard Cannibal Clan story, along the lines of Wrong Turn or Texas Chainsaw
Massacre, but it takes place in a New Jersey ghetto. In today's world, that
ghetto in NJ is just as isolated as the solitary farm in Appalachia.

Ochse goes on to discuss what a Redneck is, and gives a comparison of the
'stereotype' with great examples from current works. He boils it down to a
perspective on the world that's derived from the isolation, the lack of
"book-learning" and a reliance on intuition. He adds in this sort of fiction
relies more heavily on dynamic characterization, but I think that's a good
target regardless of subgenre.

What really spoke to me in this piece is Ochse treatment of style. He claims
that Backwoods Horror is neither genre nor subgenre, but a style. Maybe, maybe
not. The style he goes on to describe, though, is one I've found myself striving
for as of late. He says that "imagery fails as sentence structures expand", and
he cites Ed Lee as an example of strong prose through "active voice and
transitive verbs." The writer still has to describe things to the reader, but:

> This is done with short, declarative sentences and strong transitive verbs.
> The reader gets the image in a one-two punch instead of a long visual
> wrestling match.

I've found that the more I focus on achieving this style of writing, the less my
work wanders. I guess in a way it forces me to get to the point, and I think it
creates a fast pace for the reader regardless of the level of action.

**Youth Gone Wild, _Lee Thomas (aka Thomas Pendleton)_**

I'm not interested in writing YA stuff, but there are some interesting
observations in here. Thomas notes that teens are in a unique point in their
lives, and I don't think anyone can argue with that. Teens are in a constant
struggle, one that can serve as a metaphor for the human conditions of life and
death, of movement and journey, and of loss. These are all very powerful
emotions that can serve as underpinnings for good horror.

The rest of the article covers usage of slang (sparingly, just like dialect),
boundaries, and an overview of what editors look for in teen fiction. Not
interesting to me.

**Writing Horror comic books - And Graphic Novels, _David Campiti_**

This was another enlightening article. As with anthologies, I personally never
considered writing comic books. Much of the actual writing advice in here is a
rehash of ideas presented throughout with some focus on comics, but the gem is
revealing how lucrative comic books actually be for a writer.

**Acts of Madness: Writing Horror for the Stage, _Lisa Morton_**

I have no interest in being a playwright. Morton's article covers the
peculiarities of being a playwright, from working with a company to the
mechanics of portraying visceral horror on the stage. But, I personally found
nothing in there that would help me be a better writer. Not a shortcoming of the
article, just a mismatch of interests.

**Fear Spins Off: The Tie-In Novel Comes Into Its Own, _Yvonne Navarro_**

Tie-Ins are a long way off for me. If ever. Actually, probably never. I prefer
to work in my world, not someone else's. Navarro makes it pretty clear that
Tie-Ins are really only available to writers who have proven themselves, so
experience and reliability are key to even getting a chance in this space.

I found it interesting that Tie-Ins are usually written just from the script. It
explains why the visualizations contained in the novel version often stray quite
a bit from the movie.

**The Play's the Thing on the Doorstep: Writing Video and Role-Playing Games,
_Richard E. Dansky_**

Another one I'm not interested in at this point. I'm just trying to be a better
writer! Anyhow, writing for RPGs and video games is clearly a team sport. Dansky
does a nice job of delineating the writer's role in both processes.

**Now Fear This: Writing horror for Audio Theater, _Scott Hicky and Robert
Madia_**

Another interesting medium to work with, one I might tackle some day. What I
found fascinating, although not surprising, is that dialog has to spell things
out for the listener. What makes for good dialog in print makes for terribly
ambiguous audio scripting.

Hicky and Madia also make the claim that "...the time is ripe for a comeback of
the genre in new and emerging media." Okay, yes, the Internet certainly provides
a readily accessible channel for setting audio theater. But, having an
accessible channel doesn't mean this will make a comeback. I'm not arguing
against it, but I didn't see anything in the article aside from "the internet
makes it so" to support this statement. Is there an audience for it? In the face
of competition from the likes of On-Demand cable and streaming video like
YouTube, is there a contingent of folks other than the nostalgic few to make and
keep audio theater horror as a viable market? I don't know, but it seems
counterintuitive to me.

**Good Characters and Cool Kills: Writing the Horror Screenplay, _Brendan
Deneen_**

What I got most from Deneen's article is a sense of proportion. He covers the
issues of premise, protagonist, villian, kills, second act, and conclusion, much
of it similar to what's been said before.

In his discussion on Second Act and Conclusion, he gets at something not really
covered. The idea of timing (or pacing), and how it needs to be tracked and
manipulated to meet audience expectation. He talks in terms of screen time, but
I think it's an important notion. In order to keep things moving along, to keep
the audience engaged in the middle, the story must have layers. And, it's during
the second act that those layers are explored and peeled back, momentarily
leaving the prime horror element to explore the lives of the characters. It's a
good framework, I think, for tackling the middle of any story, not just
screenplays. The conclusion, then, serves to tie all the layers together. He
adds that in a screenplay, the conclusion should be open-ended enough for a
sequel.

One other bit Deneed pulled out that I had not put any thought into is that the
protagonist and villain should have a direct connection. When I read it, I
thought, "duh". But in considering my current work, I realized I had not made a
direct connection yet between the two. So, I got some work ahead of me.

NB: All in all, I didn't get a lot out of this section. I think that's because
it covers so much in such broad terms that there's bound to be parts that aren't
of interest to all horror writers.
