---
layout: post
title: Getting Back Into It
author: David
toc: false
socialShare: false
date: 2016-01-10
tags: [motivation, taekwondo, writing]
comments: true
---

Nearly four years ago, in early 2012, I started taking Taekwondo. I was
overweight, out of shape, but my oldest minion had been taking classes for a
year plus and had just turned old enough to start doing family classes. So I
buckled down, drank plenty of water, tried not to smoke so much and gave it a
shot.

I didn't just show up to class with him one day, though. The last thing I wanted
was for my son to see his old man collapse in a fit of coughing or pass out from
exhaustion or wind up twisting himself into so many Gordian knots even the EMTs
wouldn't be able to save him. I took adult classes for a few months to get a
bead on where I really stood physically. Turned out I wasn't in all that bad of
shape. Also, apparently very few folks actually went to the adult classes, so I
wound up getting a bunch of private lessons at regular cost and getting to know
the masters pretty well.

After a few months, I started going to the family classes with my son. And aside
from occasionally getting round-housed by a pre-teen, all was well.

Fast-forward to November 2015. My second son has arrived and earned his dark
green belt. My first son and I are both preparing for our black belt tests.
Things are seemingly going well. But they're not.

I'd started experiencing some discomfort early to mid 2015, wound up at the
doctor's in July with back pain, was given some meds and sent on my way. I'm not
huge on taking pills, but I tried one anyhow. Didn't much like the way it made
me feel, so I opted instead to put a little more effort into stretching my back
muscles. Though intermittent, the pain was not going away. In fact, it actually
got worse, but so slowly and so unpredictably that I didn't really take much
notice until November 18, when I wound up going back to the doctor. I'll spare
the details of my visit, but the diagnosis was a left inguinal hernia. My black
belt test was already scheduled for December 5.

Needless to say, I cancelled my test and stopped going to classes while I sorted
the situation out. I met with the surgeon December 2, had the surgery on
December 14, and let myself recover for the following few weeks.

Yesterday, January 9, I returned to Taekwondo. In the space of a month or so,
I'd put some extra weight back on and my joints had become relatively stiff and
inflexible. The moves were familiar, yet I was clumsy and uncertain in my
execution. My performance was less than stellar, at times a little embarrassing
considering a mere month prior I was deemed ready to take my black belt test,
but I tried my best, and that's what mattered. I showed up. I tried. And before
long I'll be back to where I was and headed for more improvement.

Why am I writing about this on a blog (using the term loosely) that hasn't been
updated in three years? Because I learned a few things in 2015 that are worth
capturing, if for nothing else as a reminder to me going forward.

First, hernias suck. However, mine was relatively minor. The surgeon didn't have
to go through any muscle to fix it, I was in and out of surgery in roughly an
hour, and only used pain medication for one day. A good friend of mine at work
had undergone similar surgery a month or so prior to mine, but his damage was
more extensive and required a longer recovery time. By the way, talking with him
is part of what took me back to the doctor on November for a proper diagnosis.
Anyhow, my point here is that _no matter how much your tough experience sucks,
in all likelihood someone else has it worse_. My hernia was tough on me, but not
nearly as tough as it could have been. In fact, I'm pretty damned lucky as far
as hernias go.

Second, _when you feel pain or discomfort, it pays to take time and figure out
why_. Between July and November I did nothing about my physical pain and
discomfort. I tried to ignore it in the hopes it would all go away. Not usually
the best tactic to take. The pain was telling me something was wrong, and I
should have listened more closely sooner than later.

Third, when getting back into something you've stepped away from, you have to be
forgiving of yourself. _It's unreasonable to expect to pick up exactly where you
left off when taking time away from something_. It's okay to take a step back.
In fact, it's more than okay. It's human.

Those three things apply to a much broader situation in my life, one represented
in some ways by the fact that I haven't posted on this blog in three years. Just
like the hernia pain cause so much difficulty in my Taekwondo, I've suffered
some stresses over the past few years that have affected my writing. Most
notably, I took a new role at my company three years ago. If I recall correctly,
my start date was January 21, 2013.

In the most general terms, I took a new role that relied less on my strict
technical skills and forced me to work more on my people skills. Like the
hernia, that new role was, and at times continues to be, _a tough experience_.
Unlike the hernia, I took the role voluntarily precisely because I knew it would
be tough in ways and challenge me to work on aspects of my personality that I've
neglected. And even though the experience was tough, I'm actually very
privileged to have a good paying job at a company that cares for its employees
and to even have the opportunity for choosing to change roles. This was my
choice, and by virtue of that fact alone my tough experience _pales in
comparison to many of those around me_. I have friends and family who suffer,
some physically, other emotionally, on a daily basis. Life for them is a
struggle. I will not pretend my tough experiences are as bad as theirs, but they
are the only experiences I have to share. If you think I have it pretty good, I
happen to agree.

Even though the change in role was voluntary, and I expected some degree of pain
and challenge, I also underestimated the number and types of new stressors
involved. Essentially the role was more work than a single person could tackle.
In fact, a couple of months in my boss and his boss asked that my role be split
into two. For whatever reasons that didn't happen until around October 2015, and
by mid-2013 I'd mostly forgotten I was doing the work of two. The matter would
come up at times with my boss (who's been a champion for me since day one), but
for the most part I soldiered on, did the best I could, safe in the knowledge
that I had full direct managerial support in my effort to accomplish what I
could. I expected the pain of growth, the stress of having to stretch myself
further in ways I hadn't before, but what I neglected to realize was that the
pain and stress were from more than just normal growth. _Something more was
wrong_. The stress affected my productivity, my personality, my happiness, yet
it came on so gradually that I failed to notice. These problems manifested most
notably in my writing life, but the energy drain affected me pretty much across
the board: work, family, friends, writing. Three years since I've even attempted
a blog post. I spent a year plus working on a science fiction novel an effort to
help me stretch and grow as a writer, only to scrap it because it was too tough.
I started a side project that combines analytics and fiction, only to let that
dwindle as well. I've been working on the sequel to Tearstone, but that's been a
slog at times and the thought has crossed my mind more than once that I should
just give up on it.

But I won't.

Like I mentioned above, my role was finally split in October 2015. A second
person was brought in and roughly half my responsibilities were given to him.
Again, I'm lucky. He's smart, trustworthy, and very capable. During November and
December I gave myself permission to slack off on the writing, not because I was
giving up but because I realized that I needed to let myself recover from the
stress I'd only recently recognized. I needed to heal.

I had originally planned on having the first draft to the Tearstone sequel done
by the end of 2015. I'm only half-way through, but I'm back at it, and I've
brought with me something I haven't typically been good at - the capacity to
forgive myself for not being perfect. _I cannot pick up exactly where I left off
in my writing_, but I will get back there, and probably much sooner than I
think.

I will have this first draft finished well before June rolls around, but if I
don't, I'll forgive myself and keep working at it.
