---
title: A Fogged-Out Landscape
author: David
toc: false
socialShare: false
layout: post
date: 2009-10-17
categories: [archive, broken_abbey, shu_journal]
---

It's wonderful how much we can learn from stories, particularly when well told.
Stephen King spends the first part of his book, _On Writing_, by walking the
reader through a series of 'fogged-out' memories. The book itself is about
writing. But he sets the stage by doing what he does best, and tells the story
of what made him what he is today.

I can't say if it was intentional on his part, but in telling what he considers
his "C.V.", King demonstrates a series of important lessons that were critical
in shaping him. Notice I said demonstrate. I think this is, perhaps, one of the
first aspects he teaches us. His book is about writing, but instead of listing
out a series of lessons, he shows us what he learned and how he learned it. It
is a vehement adherence to the old adage of "show, don't tell". I've read too
many books and articles on writing that do little more than list out rules or
guidelines or maxims or adages or aphorisms or whatever word you want to use.
But, in the end, they're nothing more than a handful of words on a page that
leave the reader with little more than a sense that there's something to
memorize. There's no feeling in the lessons they impart, no connection to the
reader. Just rules.

I also think that each person who reads his book will come away with different
insights based on how they relate King's stories to themselves. I'll recount
what I learned from this, but by no means is this an exhaustive list of lessons
to be found. It's one of those things that you simply must read for yourself in
order to get at the real value.

Humor and Horror are very close cousins. As writers, we don't necessarily need
to avoid one in favor of the other. King emphasizes that having a sense of humor
is important. Rather, we need to be aware of both and conscious of when we cross
the line between the two. He learned this (sort of) early on from his experience
with a baby sitter who would fart on his face. Boy could I relate - for me, it
was my brother. He also tells the story of how he was cut off the list for being
in Honor Society due to his sense of humor, and how he's happy to have humor
over prestige any day.

Good ideas don't come from some common place that we must learn to tap. For him,
they come from taking two unrelated things and putting them together. He
demonstrates this by discussing how the ideas for several of his stories
appeared. This is pretty common advice anymore, but I think he does a really
good job of demonstrating it.

Even Stephen King felt shame about his writing. I just can't imagine this guy
ever being ashamed of his writing, but he lays it out. Early on, there were
people in his life, authority figures, who thought that writing horror was a
waste of his talent. That shame stuck with him for a while. There's always going
to be someone who will try to make you feel bad about your ability to create and
how you choose to use it. Don't let it keep you down. That's a tough one to deal
with. I know I've experienced shame, I even tried to set my desire to write
aside, chalk it up to some sort of childish endeavor. But it caught up with me.
There's misery in letting other people manipulate you through shame.

The first draft of a story is you telling it to yourself. The second draft and
beyond are you telling it to someone else. This is one I personally struggle
with. The perfectionist in me wants to do it right the first time and be done
with it. I have no idea why that's part of my personality. I suppose, if I look
at my parents, there's something of a perfectionist in each of them. But it's
also not fair for me to attribute that to them at my age. I think part of it is
also living in the 9 to 5 culture. When someone is paying you by the hour,
they're not inclined to just let you try until you get it right. I've also read
that perfectionism is a form of fear, a way of delaying the end of something.
Sounds weird, but okay, I guess it's possible. Whatever the reason, the
important thing is that I'm aware of it now, and I can work on giving myself
permission to use the first draft to tell myself the story. Then I can go back
and rewrite it for everyone else.

King gets into this idea of work ethic, which is not something I've every really
heard directly associated with writing (or any creative endeavor). It's more
than just perseverance. He talks about a poem his wife wrote when they were
still in school. Part of what made the poem so appealing to him was that, in a
time when people were just writing crap out of thin air (my words, not his), she
constructed a poem with intent and full understanding of what she was trying to
accomplish. I can really relate to this. My undergraduate work involved several
poetry writing classes. I saw my fair share of words thrown together with
disregard to craft. I did my fair share, as well. In the long run, it's
unsatisfying for everyone involved.

During a rough period in his life, when he was working hard and felt like he was
just repeating his mother's life, King finds himself thinking that that isn't
what his life was supposed to be. I suppose at one time or another we may all
think this, and he admits as much. The difference, and this isn't anything
unique to writing, is that King did something about it. Even when the writing
was hard, when it came infrequently, and the day-to-day drained his life away,
he never gave up. This is a quality most successful people share, and I think it
also relates to work ethic. Never give up.

Even from the start, King had emotional support. His mother encouraged him, and
later on, his wife encouraged him. This isn't advice for the writer, but for
those around him or her. King sums it up: "Just believing is usually enough."

King gives background on the story of _Carrie_. He drafted three single-spaced
pages of the novel, and then threw them away. His wife recovered them later, and
encouraged him to work on it (there's the support), but what I found really
interesting is why he threw those pages away in the first place. He gives four
reasons, and provides them in order from least important to most important:

1.  It didn't move him emotionally.
2.  He didn't like the lead character.
3.  He wasn't comfortable with the setting or the all-female cast of characters.
4.  The story wouldn't pay off unless it was pretty long - longer than what the
    men's magazine market supported at the time. He didn't think he could sell
    it.

Look at that list again - it speaks volumes about King's work ethic and his
sense of writing as a business. The least important thing on his list was that
it didn't move him emotionally. The most important was whether or not he could
sell it. It turns out that he was wrong about \#4, but the point is, it was at
the forefront of his mind when writing. He treated it as a career, it was a
source of income for him and his family, not some esoteric activity he did on
the side. I suppose some might think these priorities aren't in the right order,
but I think they are. In order to be an author, one must recognize and engage in
writing as a business as well as a creative endeavor. Writing a book is easy.
Sit down and bang away at a keyboard until you've produced somewhere between
50,000 and 200,000 words. That doesn't make you an author, although it's good
practice and a necessary part. Sit down and do the same thing with all the
awareness and intent of one doing business, producing something that has market
value, and now you're an author. It doesn't have to be a big market, but in the
end, authorship comes through sales. Okay, so I guess the first time through is
for yourself, as discussed above. But, it must be refined into marketable
material.

King wraps up his C.V. with the story of his battle with drugs and alcohol.
Through it all, he kept writing. In retrospect, it's clear that many of the
works he produced were related to this battle. Some are more direct than others.
Part of writing fiction is developing metaphors for life, revealing truths
through lies. But in discussing his drug abuse and how his works relate to it,
King gives a spectacular demonstration of fiction as a metaphor. More
importantly, though, is that King shows us that his fiction contains metaphors
for his life. That, I think, is key. It's a combination of the idea of metaphor
and the idea of writing what you know. Your work will likely contain metaphors
for your own life, and getting in touch with those personal metaphors can help
develop both your work and you.

There's a little section after his C.V. called "What Writing Is". Kings spends
just a few pages on the subject, but they provided an immense amount of clarity
to me. One of my problems is getting caught up in details. I think it must be
related to the perfectionist in me, but at times I think it's also a form of
procrastination. Somewhere I read that writing is about the half-described
gesture, and King says as much. King describes writing as a form of telepathy,
and that what's important is the message, not the details. Trust the receiver /
reader to know what you're talking about, that a cage need only be described as
a cage if it's not the core of the message. He closes the section with some
noteworthy advice:

> Come to [the page] any way but lightly. Let me say it again: _you must not
> come lightly to the blank page._
>
> ...If you can take it seriously, we can do business. If you can't or won't,
> it's time for you to close the book and do something else.

I'm here to take it seriously.
