---
title: Measuring Quality â€“ Words or Pages
author: David
layout: post
date: 2010-01-31
categories: [archive, broken_abbey, shu_journal]
---

I'm a couple of weeks into my second term in
[Seton Hill's MA WPF](http://http://www.setonhill.edu/academics/fiction/index.cfm)
program. My thesis is a marketable horror novel, targeted at 350 pages. My
personal goal is to complete the 1st draft by the end of this term, and spend
the rest of my program editing and revision. Or rewriting if my mentors so
command.

None of that is particularly interesting, but they're facts that lay the
groundwork for what's been on my mind lately. Every professional writer develops
their own flavor of discipline, without which they would be unable to sustain
professional standing. It's actually pretty common among most successful people
regardless of profession to develop a habit around their chosen work. What I've
been interested in is how writers measure their progress?

Last term I measured my progress in terms of word count. It seems reasonable
since the publishing industry is largely word count driven. Every submission
guideline includes a word-count limit. The industry has accepted word-counts
attached to novels in each genre. For instance, horror novels range around
300-400 pages, but an epic fantasy comes closer to 700 pages.

What I found, when I measured word count, was that I spent too much time
generating words to reach that count. It became too easy to wander on the pages,
adding words here and there to meet a necessary but arbitrary goal of 500 words
per day. I did pretty well--although Stephen King recommends shooting for at
least 1000 per day. But I had to ditch a lot of it due to the bad behavior that
specific goal encouraged.

For this term, I've opted to measure my progress in terms of pages, a page being
roughly equal to 250 words. My goal is to write 4 pages per day, or 1000 words
per day to align with King's recommendation. If you're familiar with On Writing,
you'll know that King actually counts a page as 200 words, but for my purpose 4
is as good a stepping stone as 5. I'll ratchet my goal up another notch next
term.

Does it really matter? I put some thought into this over my break, and these
past few weeks have shown my hunch correct. Yes, I write better when my goal is
page count over word count. I focus better on the story and don't worry at all
about producing dense copy. Before, I would work in extra words. But now, I can
write whole pages of dialog, which tends to be pretty sparse in terms of words
per page, and still make my goals. I just don't care, because a page is a page.

In addition, it helps to remember that word count for a publisher is really a
means of estimating number of printable pages. They take the word count, divide
by around 250 (I think this varies), and arrive at page count. Novelists don't
get paid by the word, and I wouldn't want paid that way anyhow. My goal is to
write well-told stories with efficient, emotionally charged language, not drudge
on for miles, taxing both the reader and myself by counting every step along the
way.
