---
layout: post
title: Charity Anthology Released
author: David
date: "2012-08-08T05:39:00-04:00"
tags:
  - anthology
  - news
  - fiction
  - seton hill
tumblr_url: http://tumblr.davidlday.com/post/28973186271/charity-anthology-released
---

Yesterday marked the release of Hazard Yet Forward, a charity anthology composed
of stories by seventy-six writers connected to the Seton Hill University Writing
Popular Fiction program. The anthology was compiled in support of Donna Munro,
an 2004 graduate of the program. Find out more details at the HYF website, and
check out the Amazon page. There was a lot of buzz on Facebook and Twitter
(still going even this morning, I believe), and the anthology quickly rose among
Amazon’s Hot New Releases to crest at #1 in Short Story Anthologies yesterday
afternoon.

I haven’t seen too many blog posts yet from contributing writers, but I suggest
taking a look at Bizarrowriter’s Blog. He has some very positive things to say
about the Donna, the program, and the associated In Your Write Mind workshop.

For me, this is a tremendous display of community at work. With all the turmoil
in the publishing industry and the subsequent in-fighting among writers, it’s
refreshing to see a significant and diverse group of writers set all of that
aside and band their voices together in aid.

This isn’t by any means the first or most successful anthology of its kind. I’ve
bought several charity anthologies in the past. It is, however, the first
opportunity I’ve had to observe the process behind putting such a beast
together. It happened quickly, spearheaded by three hard-working and committed
individuals. And the number and caliber of folks who contributed works to the
anthology simply amazes me.

Every now and then we need to remind ourselves that it’s not all about sales or
money or Twitter or Facebook or the next big thing in publishing. A significant
part of life is about committing to what’s most important and banding together
with like-minded people. Art reflects life, and writing is an art, so being a
writer should including being supportive and generous.

Pick up a copy of the anthology. Have a look at what a solid community can do.
