---
title: Thoughts on Nate Kenyon’s “Sparrow Rock”
author: David
layout: post
date: 2010-08-24
categories: [archive, broken_abbey, shu_journal]
---

I just finished reading [Nate Kenyon](http://www.natekenyon.com)'s latest novel,
[_Sparrow Rock_](http://www.amazon.com/Sparrow-Rock-Nate-Kenyon/dp/0843963778/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1270214210&sr=1-1),
a story of a group of high school kids who find themselves trapped in a bomb
shelter by accident just as the end of the world arrives. Read the official
synopsis from [Nate's site](http://natekenyon.com/sparrow-rock-synopsis).

The novel has received excellent reviews at multiple sites, and I think the
praise is well-deserved. Kenyon has produced a fast-paced, engaging tale of
survival. This is the second book I've read by Kenyon. I read
_[Bloodstone](http://natekenyon.com/fiction/bloodstone-synopsis/2005/11/22)_
some months back as a sample of a first novel, but have yet to get to a post on
it. I thought it an excellent tale as well, and I will keep his work at the top
of my list from here on out.

**Spoilers ahead! If you haven't read the book, you might want to read this
later.**

What I found most interesting about _Sparrow Rock_ was Kenyon's choice of point
of view. The tale is told in first person, and while it's not all that rare, I
wondered immediately why Kenyon made that choice. And about half-way through, I
reached an "ah-ha" moment.

Pete, the main and POV character, is trapped with his friends, but there's one
friend he's particularly close to: Tessa. Pete killed his abuse father years
earlier (yes, the guy deserved it) and Tessa helped him recover his sanity after
the incident. Summing it up like that, I'm sure you can guess why Nate choose
first-person. Tessa is a figment of Pete's imagination, and to have told the
story any other way would have ruined her part in the tale.

I'm not a big fan of alternate personalities in stories. It think it can and has
been done well--King's _The Dark Half_, where you know pretty much from the
get-go. But I also think it's an over-used device across the board--movies, TV,
books. But here, Kenyon pulls it off and in such a way that it adds value to the
story without feeling trite or cliché. A big part of my turn-off to the
alternate personality is that too often the reader is kept in the dark until the
end, where the big reveal relies on reader surprise to "It was me all along!"
The story hinges on the fact that the reader doesn't know until just the right
moment, and if the reader knows too soon, the gig is up and the book gets put
down or the TV gets turned off. Blech. Enough already.

However, _Sparrow Rock_ doesn't hinge on this. Tessa is an intricate part of how
Pete behaves, but she is not a key part of why he survives. And she definitely
played no part in the events that lead up to the apocalypse. She's just an
aspect of his character hewn from the trauma of killing his father. She's a part
of what makes him interesting, a key to his internal conflict.

I recall the exact moment I realized she was imaginary. The kids all vacate the
shelter's bedroom when they discover a huge mosquito that had been feeding on
one of them (disgusting and awesome!). They run into the shelter's dining area
and lock the door, and Pete realizes that Tessa is missing. He busts back into
the bedroom, kills the mosquito, only to see Tessa standing behind the other
kids in the dining area. In that moment, I realized that only Pete ever spoke to
Tessa. None of the other characters ever acknowledged her presence, but they did
respond to Pete at times as if he'd lost his mind, usually just after he had
spoken to Tessa.

Pete acknowledges later in the narrative that she's imaginary, and part of his
coming to grips with killing his father is to abandon her as a support system.
She helps him survive, she's harmless to the others (in fact, early on Pete
talks about how she helped change bandages on one of the other kids), and she
helps the reader understand just how broken he is. I think, in the end, Pete's
survival is all the more merited because he's not only fought the crazy,
postapocalyptic bugs, but because he's had to work though an issue he had
resigned to living with long before the story starts.

I highly recommend this book to anyone looking for postapocalyptic horror. I
can't wait to read more of Kenyon's work. He's definitely earned my respect as a
writer.
