---
title: “Urban Gothic” and The Minotaur
layout: post
date: "2009-09-24T00:02:00-05:00"
categories: [archive, broken_abbey, shu_journal]
---

[Brian Keene’s](http://www.briankeene.com/) recently released _Urban Gothic_
brought to mind the myth of the Minotaur. A group of teens is thrown into a
labyrinthine house whose twists and turns extend far below the ground in a
neglected neighborhood. Their first encounter is with a hulking, deformed
creature whose strength seems insurmountable.

Keene tells this story from multiple points of view, and I think that worked
really well for the fast-paced action. I noticed, too, that Keene give the
reader an immediate indication of POV change by having the POV character
identified, in most cases, in the first sentence of any section change. I
noticed it because I was looking for it, but I don’t think it was in any way
repetitive or distracting.

In many ways, this book felt like a typical teen-scream horror movie. Teenagers,
lost, creepy house, cannibals running loose. Lots of blood, death, people making
bad choices that lead to their death. But I don’t believe these elements are
just by chance.

Teenagers are, by their very nature, in a transitory state - in the midst of a
journey from childhood to adulthood. It’s important to me because it places the
characters in a state where the reader expects them to make mistakes and learn
lessons. The creepy house and the labyrinth that stretches out beneath it are
also important, as it builds the confusion, gives a physical manifestation to
what teenagers experience.

What really stood out most to me, however, is the constant reinforcement of the
first two words of the novel: Shit Happens.

In Douglas Winter’s book, _Stephen King: The Art of Darkness_, Winter talks
about King’s naturalistic approach to plot. I like how Keene puts it better -
shit happens. Keene forsakes the idea of having to provide a logical explanation
for the events in his novel. And really, what explanation does the reader need?
It’s a standard
“[Cannibal Clan](http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/CannibalClan)”
trope, and it works just fine. Shit happens - these kids take a wrong turn, wind
up in the wrong neighborhood, encounter the wrong people, and all but one wind
up as dinner. As one character thinks to herself in the very beginning: _Shit
happens. And when it does, things get fucked up._ This isn’t to say the story is
without plot, but the plot revolves around action and escape, not the clan
itself.

I mentioned earlier that the book made me think of the Minotaur. There were a
lot of mythological symbols that I picked up on in just the first few pages.
Whether it was intentional, I can’t say. But I think it draws the reader into a
frame of mind that prepares them for the bizarre and brings the reader to accept
that, in the end, there is no explanation. One of the elements I found - the
teens get lost when the drive decides to leave Pennsylvania by crossing the
river into Camden, NJ. The crossing of the river could be viewed as a crossing
into the underworld. Keene goes on to describe hookers as living dead, there’s
technological failure (car breaks down), and a general decay into chaos.

Another interesting parallel with the Minotaur story is how the final escape is
made. Early in the story, one of the kids overhears two of the Cannibal’s
talking (while butchering one of his friends - sweet). One comments to the other
that he hopes they don’t make it to the basement and find the only way out.
Well, that’s what draws the survivors to the basement, where they spend the
large part of the book looking for a way out, and most getting killed in the
process. But, just like the Minotaur story, the only way out seems to be back
the way they came. I say ‘seems’ because, a minor character, I had half-expected
one of the characters to tie a string. I think it worked as a plot device, a way
to keep the characters moving, but I felt a little confused. There’s a minor
character, who I’ll discuss in a later post, that does manage to find his way
into this underground labyrinth from a ‘back door’ of sorts. But, this door it
seems to be one way, only letting someone come in, not get out. And it’s right
near the house. I was a little confused, not because the kids had to go back,
but because I was never clear on whether the cannibals knew they were being
overheard and intentionally lured the kids down, or if there really was a back
door down there somewhere.

Whether Keene used the Minotaur myth as a framework for the story isn’t really
something I’m trying to comment on. Rather, I think the Minotaur myth is
reflected in a subset of our modern horror stories as the teenagers trapped in
the scary [woods, cabin, hotel, house, etc.], chased by the [axe murderer,
cannibal, guy with one red shoe, etc.].
