---
title: Thoughts on Bently Little’s “The Town”
layout: post
date: "2010-08-08"
categories: [archive, broken_abbey, shu_journal]
---

[Bently Little](http://bit.ly/ayRVNF)'s [_The Town_](http://amzn.to/a5BpnT) was
published in 2000, and I think even 10 years later it holds up as a good story.
I found Bently's take on small-town horror refreshing in many ways, even though
the idea of horror in a small town isn't so unique by today's standards. The
story involves a family of six who move back to the father's home town after
winning the lottery to simplify their lives and exchange the dangers of LA for
the assumed tranquility of McGuane, Arizona.

Once the family moves, a very serious and diverse set of circumstances occur.
Several deaths take place, the town is slowly overrun by evil spirits, and some
very bizarre possessions happen--one involving a Molokan church growing hair.

I really appreciate how Bently handled the characters. Winning the lottery is
supposed to be a good thing--as is anything that brings a person into money--but
in this case, Bently provides what feels like a more realistic take on the
matter. The father, Gregory, finds himself at odds because he no longer has
purpose. He doesn't have to work for money and is no longer tightly connected
with the town. He finds some pet projects, one of which is to help an old high
school friend redevelop his café into a small entertainment venue, all of which
wind up backfiring. Everything Gregory experiences in the book, the supernatural
as well as his well-intentioned actions, drive him slowly insane. I cared about
this man, and the rest of the family, because even though they had money their
lives were tough. I was reminded of the main characters in Ed Lee's
[_The Golem_](http://amzn.to/cjs1rX)--also rich--and the reason I didn't care
much for them was that they had options. I felt they could have walked away at
any time and that their hardship was self-inflicted. In the case of _The Town_,
the money won from the lottery was paid annually (I think @ 80K), the family
spent most of the first check on the new house, and there was no walking away.
They were stuck in their situation for at least a year, until the next check
arrived. To make it even worse, the house they bought had a sordid
history--unknown by Gregory at the time of purchase--and there was little to no
chance of them reselling it.

Bently also tied the events in the story up very well in the end. So many
strange things occur, that mid-way through I found myself thinking there was no
way everything related. But through an interesting convergence of Molokan and
Native American mythologies, Bently came up with a satisfying explanation that
unified the deaths, possessions, and general craziness of the town. And to have
the solution to the hauntings require the cooperation of the two
cultures--through ritual and force--really reinforced the explanation of the
hauntings.

I was unfamiliar with the term Molokan before reading this book, and while I
didn't read it for a cultural lesson I found myself reading up a little on the
culture. They're a fascinating sect of Christianity from Russia, and I think
Bently's use of Molokans instead of the more familiar Catholics gave the book an
interesting take on christian spirituality and mythology.

If you like  small-town horror and supernatural horror, this book should be on
your list. I'll definitely pick up more of Bently's work down the road.
