---
title: Another Round of How-To, Part 2
layout: post
date: "2010-03-23"
categories: [archive, broken_abbey, shu_journal]
---

This is part two of a three-part journal on *How to Write Tales of Horror,
Fantasy & Science Fiction*, Edited by J. N. Williamson, a collection of How-To
articles by some of the best horror writers, circa 1987.
 [Part one](/2010/03/01/another-round-of-how-to/) covered chapters 1-8.

In my first post, I mentioned how strikingly similar the advice is to that found
in _On Writing Horror_, another collection of How-To articles by some of
horror's best writers circa 2007.  I've still found this to hold true.  I don't
mean that as a slight against either work, as the essays in both are unique to
the authors.  For me, this reinforces that the advice found within each work has
a certain timeless quality to it even though markets have changed.

**_Stepping Into the Shadows_, Charles Grant**

Grant opens by telling us that the main purpose of horror "is to tell a story
that will, somewhere along the line, give the reader a chill, a shiver, a good
scare."  Without that, the story won't work.  In order to set up a situation
that will deliver, Grant prefers "shadows more than daylight."

What Grant is getting at is that horror is not about the shock value.  While
shock can and often does have its place in modern horror, it is not the purpose.
 Well-described scenes of violence are, in Grant's words, "unimaginative and
untalented".  The reaction to such scenes are not fear, but revulsion.  Shock is
but one tool in the toolbox of the horror writer.

Grant prescribes three elements for good horror, all of which he feels must be
present.

The first element is sympathetic characters.  We must have characters that are
likable.  Or if not entirely likable, the characters must be someone the reader
cares about.

The second element is tension.  We can't just throw the reader into the midst of
the storm, we must let them see it brewing on the horizon first.

The last element is fantasy.  Grant is talking about avoiding rehashing old
monsters.  To keep our horror fresh, we must use fresh monsters.  Monsters are
literalizations of our fear.  Grant's main point here is that we can keep our
monsters fresh by working with the unknown.

I think Grant is right about these three elements, and I also agree that while
shock is a tool in the horror writer's toolbox, it is by no means the necessary
for good horror.  One of the reasons I love H. P. Lovecraft is that he often
keeps the horror out of sight, leaving the most frightening aspects for the work
of the reader's imagination.

**_Innocence and Terror--The Heart of Horror_, Robert R. McCammon**

Horror is about the human condition.  McCammon finds an excellent example for
this premise in "A Christmas Carol".  But it seems that even back in 1987 horror
carried the stigma of being little more than shock and gore.  Yeah, I know,
probably even well before 1987 horror carried this stigma.  But McCammon has a
great point, that horror is more than raw emotion.  In order for it to do its
job well, horror must also appeal to the intellect.

> Humanity is what's missing from bad horror fiction.  How can a reader feel the
> delicious anticipation of fear if the book has no humanity, if the characters
> aren't real enough to reach out and touch, if the world that book represents
> is not detailed and colored and lavished with attention?

McCammon also refers to innocence, which one may find a strange topic for
horror.  The concept raised my curiosity.  What he's referring to, though, isn't
necessarily the innocence of the characters, but the sense of wonder the author
brings to the work.  I think this ties back to Grant's notion of reinventing our
monsters to keep the work fresh.  Much of this article, I would say, supports
the same concepts as Grant addressed.

What it boils down to for me is that horror--any good fiction, actually--must be
about the human condition.  I've often heard some of the best work in Science
Fiction--you know, those that transcend the genre--as being in tune with the
human condition, but rarely have I heard the phrase used in praise of horror.  I
try to make the work more about the people, because I think that we can best
evoke emotions of fear by pulling the reader along through real situation with
real people.

Finally, McCammon urges us as writers to have the courage to tackle complex
issues.  As I read this, I thought of Stephen King (of course).  His work often
touches on or represents complex social issues.  *The Stand* has as a major
element the breakdown of technology and the ways in which it has failed
humanity.  I would also say _The Dark Tower_ series has much of the same ideas
around technological breakdown at its core.  *Carrie*, which I just finished
rereading, is all about the severe cruelty that adolescents are capable of.

So I think the key here is to keep our work in tune with humanity.  The more we
make the work about the human condition, the more likely we are to connect with
the issues--simple or complex--that are dear to our readers.

**\*World Building in Horror, Occult, and Fantasy Writing\*\*\***, Marion Zimmer
Bradley\*\*

Bradley's article is all about setting the rules for your work.  She tells us
that horror isn't necessarily about the supernatural, and that you accomplish
good world building through doing your homework.

She refers to isolation as being a tremendously useful element in horror, but
that creating believable isolation is difficult.  With today's ever-connected
society, it seems nearly impossible to create believable isolation.  I blame the
cell phone.  Too often we see the old "No Signal" bit pulled in movies and
stories.  John August has a nice little write-up on his blog called
[_"No signal" is the new air duct_](http://johnaugust.com/archives/2009/no-signal).
 So how do we deal with building worlds?

Bradley has some good advice in her piece, which I won't recap here.  But I will
touch on a few items that are important to me.

First, she brings up the idea of superheros, and the difficulties the early
_Superman_ comics had in finding stories because he was, well, Superman.  He
could do anything.  No one could relate, and there was no way to beat him.  The
horror writer has a similar problem in the Devil.  Weak horror often calls upon
the Devil as the stock representation of evil.  She goes on to discuss Stoker's
_Dracula_ as an excellent example for setting boundaries for your bad guy.  She
recounts a passage where Dr. Van Helsing explains all the limits on the vampire,
which serves as a great example for how the horror writer can keep the bad guy
from being "the Devil".  In my thesis novel, I originally set out with a bad guy
that was too awesome.  As I've worked through it, I whittled away all his
awesome superpowers and tried to put constraints in place that could be used
against him.

The other piece in Bradley's article that stuck with me is near the end.
 Bradley says,

> The major choice, then, for the writer of horror, fiction or nonfiction, is to
> choose between limited and unlimited views of reality--the horrors of the
> tabloid writer, the true-crime addict, or the specialist in abnormal
> psychiatry, whether or not the unknown belongs to a different order of
> reality--to choose between the worlds, in fact, of the policeman, the priest,
> or the parapsychologist.

I think she does a nice job of distilling horror worlds down in that last part.
 While the work may not contain a policeman, a priest, or a parapsychologist,
the world represented in any horror novel could likely be represented by one of
them.  I considered my thesis novel from this perspective, and I found that I
had blended worlds--probably too much.  I was working in both the world of the
police and the world of the priest.  I might be able to make it work, but I
think by choosing one I'll get better focus on the story.

**_Sword and Sorcery, Dragon and Princess_, Darrell Schweitzer**

I'll say up front that I didn't have much interest in this article, simply
because I don't have much interest in _sword-and-sorcery_ fiction.  I love Conan
as much as the next guy, but I don't have any interest today in working in the
genre.  Schweitzer admits as much in the opening of his article, so I don't feel
bad admitting it.

Schweitzer gives a good list of pointers on how to write sword-and-sorcery,
which I won't recount here.  If you're into writing such a thing, and you're
looking for some pointer, this is a definite read.

But once I finished, I realized that there was something in horror that relates.
 If you're a Bruce Campbell or Sam Raimi fan, you probably already guessed.
 Both _Army of Darkness_ and _My Name is Bruce_ do a wonderful job as
horror parodies by taking the elements of a horror story and telling them using
the elements of _sword-and-sorcery_.  So while this article wasn't about genre
blending, it gave me a little insight into why those movies work as parodies.

**\*Science Fiction: Hard Science and Hard Conflict\*\*\***, Michael A.
Banks\*\*

This article is a three-stage guide to help those intimidated by the idea of
writing science fiction.  Why would one be intimidated?  Banks tells us, and I
think rightly so, that many writers shy away from it because of the science
aspect.  What Banks explains is that you don't need to have a deep scientific
background to write science fiction, but only a "technical orientation".

The first stage he discusses is deciding how much the technical details will
play in the story.  If the technology is just part of the setting, then there's
no need go any deeper than you would in discussing airplanes just because your
character got on a plane.  But if the technology is part of the conflict, then
you'd better be ready to go into deep detail to support the story.

The second stage is to acquire the knowledge.  Banks give plenty of examples on
how he collects knowledge, largely by leveraging people around him, or by
reading contemporary hard science fiction.

In the third stage, Banks describes how to work the science in without being
obvious.  He tells us to think of it like developing a character, and give much
of the same advice found in character development.  Avoid information dumps, use
only necessary details, and if all else fails, have on character explain
something to another.  But not in a contrived way.

While his article addresses using science in fiction, I think his last points
are relevant for how a writer in any genre can incorporate uncommon facts into a
story.  As writers, we need to be sensitive to what our readers are likely to
know so that we can avoid bludgeoning them with common facts and enlighten them
discreetly when needed.

**\*Researching Science Fantasy\*\*\***, Sharon Baker\*\*

Baker's article, like the previous article by Banks, discusses research related
to Science Fiction.  Yeah, you probably got that from the title.  But her angle
is a little different.  Instead of talking about researching facts, she
addresses a few places to draw from to create a plausible background.

The first place she discusses is people.  I found it interesting that part of
her research involved shadowing a cop, because slavery played an important part
of the world she was building.  She did this because she drew a connection and
realized that prostitutes served as a real-world analogy to the slaves in her
work.

She provides several detailed examples on other places she drew from, which
include:

- Semetic languages, used as a model to develop a new language
- The _Merck Manual_ of symptoms and treatments to develop a poison and its cure
- Oral Tradition and Middle Eastern Myth to develop a new mythology
- Personal experience with loss
- Ancient Middle Eastern Architecture to develop unique city structures

I don't necessarily believe that any one of these items is a catch-all approach
for accomplishing world building, but I do believe that what Baker demonstrates
is the need to be observant and resourceful.  She found and used as many
parallels in reality as possible when developing her work, and drawing on
reality adds to a story's plausibility.

**_Avoiding What's Been Done to Death_, Ramsey Campbell**

Campbell's article addresses the issue we all face of keeping our writing
fresh.  He says that while some people claim there's nothing new in horror, that
the situation isn't as bad as it may sound.  According to Campbell, "many of the
themes we're dealing with are so large and powerful as to be essentially
timeless."  I can agree with that.  I think that anything that touches on the
human condition is timeless.

The first advice he gives on avoiding what's been done is to be true to
yourself.  By that, he means to keep in touch with your genre by being well
read, but also to read outside your genre.  See your work as part of a larger
art.  He also suggests that you find your own voice.  This is not new advice for
me, but it bears repeating because it's so critical to developing your work.

He goes on to discuss how the idea of evil in horror is often presented "in such
a shorthand form as to be essentially meaningless--something vague out there
that causes folks to commit terrible acts, something other than ourselves,
nothing to do with us."  I have struggled with this myself.  For evil to work in
horror, it must be more than "the Devil" (to borrow from Bradley's article).  We
must put a face on it, make it tangible, and show how it relates to our
characters and our readers.  We can accomplish this by making the evil real to
us, as the writer, to get us more involved with the work and draw our own
emotional charges onto the page.

Another point of advice Campbell gives is that "the best way for a writer to
compete is with oneself, to do better than one did last time."  I think this is
often an overlooked bit of advice, but one that can help a writer focus better. 
When you compete with someone else, you're using an external measure to gage
your work.  Which can be okay, but how can you be sure that the external work
you're using is right?  I've found that once I stopped wanting to write like
[insert favorite author here], my work began to develop at a much quicker pace. 
I can never be like any other writer, or if I am, then I can never be better. 
Too often we see log lines like "the next Stephen King," or "the next Dean
Koontz."  In the sense of marketing, having such statements on a book is okay. 
But the writer should never think like that.  I don't want to be the next
Stephen King--the world already has one.  I want to be the first David L. Day.

Campell provides a few other points of advice, such as over-writing in the first
draft, combining unrelated ideas, and leaving yourself a ragged edge at the end
of a work session.  All of these are fine advice, but I think the best point of
this article is that of competing with yourself.

**_Why Novels of Fear Must do More than Frighten_, Dean R. Koontz**

Koontz's second article in the book covers going beyond the scare in horror.  He
tells us that works of horror "often fail to achieve the effect they seek
because they are trying to do _nothing else but scare the reader_.  Fear cannot
be generated in a vacuum."  We must evoke other emotions.  This article
reiterates advice found in those by Grant and McCammon.

Koontz tells us that we can get at those other emotions by making our characters
both empathetic and sympathetic.  Absolutely.  Our readers must care about and
like our characters.  Not new advice, but good reinforcement.  What Koontz
delivers here that aren't in the other articles are five common errors committed
by new writers.  I'll sum them up, but the article is worth the read.

1.  Characters must not act irrationally and must not get into trouble due to
    stupid decisions
2.  Characters must not be passive
3.  Lead characters must not be superheros who always succeed
4.  Characters must have lives shown outside the central story
5.  Lead characters must be concerned with more than just their own fate

It's the first time I've encountered a list like this, and I think they're all
good things to watch for.  Missing any one of these can lead to two-dimensional
characters that the reader either won't like or won't care about.  I struggle
with number four, and often forget to show that characters have lives that go on
outside the main story line.  But without it, can the reader ever really get to
know the character?  I don't think so.  We can learn a lot about a person by the
little, daily interactions they have.  We don't need to weigh down our work with
every little detail, but the right details in the right place will help the
reader develop a full picture of our characters.

**_The Supernatural? Naturally!_, J. N. Williamson**

I don't think there's a good way to summarize this article, so I won't even
try.  What I got from it is that we need to approach horror as fantasy, and need
to allow ourselves as reader to engage in the fantastic.  Williamson talks about
being comfortable with the ideas of the supernatural to write horror.  I can get
behind that.  What most intrigued me, though, was the extent to which Williamson
talks about his own shifting beliefs as a driver for his work.  His beliefs
serve to build story credibility and guide his work because, he says, "most
people want to believe what the majority of other persons believed or have
believed."  I think the core of his advice is:

> Consequently, if I, as an author, can buttress the otherwise-improbable
> premises of my work by what was accepted as real or true by a large number of
> my fellow human beings, it stands to reason that I am more acceptable in my
> fictive intrigues, prepared to arouse, convince, and hold the attention of
> readers for the time it takes to read that fictional work.

When I stop to consider my work, I realize there's a reason for the heavy use of
western religious elements.  I had a lot of exposure to many flavors of
Christianity as a child, as well as a good sampling of Eastern religions.  I
find my strongest work comes out when I use these elements, and it seems that my
strong belief--at least at one time in my life--in these elements is one reason
for this.  Working with what we believe adds to the realism of our stories. 
It's one aspect to writing honestly, because if we don't believe in what we're
writing, neither will our readers.

This wraps up part two.  Part three will be a couple weeks out.  Until then,
peace.
